[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> What's up, guys?
How's it going?
Thanks for coming.
[CHEERING]
Oh, you guys are very sweet.
So hopefully, you guys
are going to be here.
You guys are in
for a treat today.
Because I have the honor
to be joined onstage today
by bestselling
author, Steven Kotler.
He wrote "The Rise of
Superman," which decodes
ultimate human performance.
He co-wrote "Stealing Fire."
He co-wrote "Abundance."
He co-wrote "Bold."
So this guy has written
about technology innovation,
altered states, flow
states, and all that jazz.
And so we're going to have a
conversation today about all
the things that I obsess
about and make videos about
and he writes about.
And I'm sort of inspired
by the log line of the Edge
Foundation, which says to arrive
at the edge of the world's
knowledge, to gather the world's
most interesting minds, to put
them together in a
room, and to have
them ask each other
the questions they've
been asking themselves.
And so whenever I'm
given the opportunity
to invite somebody
to join me on stage,
I'm always like, who is
the most interesting mind
that I have access to?
And definitely, Mr. Steven
Kotler is one of those minds.
So please welcome
him onstage now.
[APPLAUSE]
>> Hello.
>> So we want to keep this
kind of a fireside chat vibe.
We want to have a real
conversation about the pressing
issues of our age, and the
things that we are obsessing
and mulling over, the
things that we are trying
to demystify, the things
that we are trying to reverse
engineer and understand.
Carl Sagan famously
said that understanding
is a kind of ecstasy.
And he also coined
the term wonder
junkie to describe that
insatiable curiosity that
haunts our dreams, the warm at
the core, the thing that makes
us look at the
cosmos, at the stars,
and at the perimeters of
our own minds to try to make
sense of what is going on.
What is shaping our world?
Where are we going?
Where have we come from?
What does it mean?
And also, how to make sure
that our understanding
of the great mysteries doesn't
get caught up in too much woo.
Because poetry is beautiful, but
science is just as beautiful.
And so today, we'll kind of
look at both sides of that coin.
So the title of this
conversation-- and it
is going to be a conversation.
I'm just kind of framing
it, is we are the gods now.
Now, what does that mean?
Now, of course, that's a kind
of heretical thing, right?
To take claim over that.
We are the gods now.
I mean, how dare we, right?
Where is the cosmic humility?
We should bow down
before the cosmos
and bow down before
the great mystery.
But it's not just
about that, right?
Carl Sagan said, we are a way
for the cosmos to know itself.
We are of nature.
We come from nature.
We are nature.
The difference is that we
can steward our own destiny.
We can govern our own path.
I am the captain of my faith,
or I'm the captain of my soul
or whatever the
hell that quote is.
But the point being that we have
this immense creative capacity
to engender our
dreams, to sort of
actualize our minds, to
manifest our imagination.
And we've created tools
that are giving us the power
to shape the world, to transform
the world, to impact the world,
to create and recreate the world
and also, to destroy the world.
And so as Stewart Brand
said, we are as gods
and might as well
get good at it.
So that's kind of the
framing, the context,
and the background
behind what we're
going to talk about today.
So we'd like to start first
with this notion of technology.
Steven Kotler co-wrote a book
with Peter Diamandis called
"Abundance--
Why the Future will be
Better Than You Think."
Most people are
terrified of the future.
They think of climate change.
They think of runaway AI.
They think of technology,
robot overlords taking
over the world, and
everything going
to shit when, in fact,
there is remarkable progress
across many fields
in technology.
And technology is
advancing at rates
we can't even begin to fathom.
So let's just kind
of start with that.
Steven--
>> Is there a question in there?
>> Yeah, sure.
Well, yeah.
The question is, what comes
to mind for you when you think
of the astounding
progress that we're seeing
in technology and innovation?
I mean, you're best friends
with Peter Diamandis.
The guy is running around
the world talking about how
we're going to save the world.
So how are we going to save
the world using technology?
>> You know how we're
going to save the world,
but we'll come back
to that answer.
>> Great.
>> I want to start with the
speed of technology, because--
>> Great.
>> --it's useful to put a
little context around it.
When Peter and I wrote
"Abundance" 10 years ago,
I guess, "Abundance" was about
individual lines of technology
that were accelerating
exponentially,
meaning they're doubling
at a periodic rate.
Computers are the
great example, right?
Every 18 months, they
get twice as fast,
but the cost stays the same
That's an exponential growth
curve.
And it starts out really
slow, and it gets really fast,
really quickly.
So if I take 30 exponential
steps or 30 regular steps
from right here--
1, 2, 3, 4, 5--
I end up 30 feet away.
Exponential steps-- it doubles.
So 1 becomes 2,
becomes 4, becomes 8.
I take 30 exponential steps.
I'm a billion feet away.
I've just orbited
the Earth 26 times.
So when we wrote
"Abundance," we were
talking about individual
lines of technology
becoming exponential.
And a technology
becomes exponential
once it becomes digital.
Once a technology
becomes digital,
it jumps on the
back of Moore's law
and starts
accelerating this way.
And in "Abundance,"
we talked about 12
different exponential
technologies that are emerging.
What we're seeing today
is these individual lines
are starting to converge, and
they're starting to overlap.
And that's starting to
produce incredible effects.
Ray Kurzweil, who's the
head of AI at Google
and who's been really
good with his predictions
about the future, has
estimated that we're
going to experience 20,000
years of technological change
in the next hundred years.
Put it in context.
It means we're going to
go-- birth of agriculture
to the Industrial Revolution
twice in 86 years.
That's the speed we're looking
at that, the speed of change
that's coming, which is
both amazing and terrifying
at the same time.
And the answer, I think,
to your question--
this is what we
said in "Abundance."
And I think this is
exactly what Stewart
meant by we are as gods, we
might as well get good at it,
is we said at this point what
the world faces-- incredibly
difficult challenges.
Our technology gives us
the power to solve them,
but it won't do
it automatically.
This is not techno
utopianism, right?
It's going to require the
greatest cooperative effort
in history to pull this off.
So all it does is give us--
it gives us an escape valve.
We can do it, but
we better figure out
how to work together.
>> Right.
Immense power, but also
immense responsibility.
And he got into this notion
of the exponential speed
of technological progress.
I mean, that 30-steps
example for me
became my sort of runaway train
to imagine the impossible,
because we have brains.
And Peter Diamandis
talks about this.
And Ray Kurzweil
We have brains that
evolved in a world that
was linear and local.
We are wired.
Our intuition about change
over time is linear.
That's just what governs
our natural intuition.
>> It's weirder than that.
Kelly MacDonald did some
really cool research.
Most of us have a built-in
10-year time horizon.
We cannot see past 10 years.
So I run a company called
the EQ with some friends.
And we bring together
technologists
and environmentalists to solve
environmental challenges.
And we have a whole
retro-casting process that
we've developed to get people to
be able to see past 10 years--
>> If we could have
those exponential lenses,
we would gain so
much perspective.
So this notion of the 30 linear
steps getting you to 30 and 30
exponential steps getting
you to a billion--
just take-- pause on
that for a second, right?
Because we're calling this,
we are the gods now, right?
30 exponential steps gets you
a billion times farther, right?
And that exponential
progress is the reason
why the smart phone in
your pocket today that you
use every day that
you take for granted,
that you complain
when the signal drops,
is a million times cheaper,
a million times smaller,
and a thousand
times more powerful
than what used to
be a $60 million
supercomputer that was half a
building in size 40 years ago.
So it doesn't take you being an
engineer, or a mathematician,
or a technologist to just
grasp that kind of progress.
The supercomputer was the size
of this room 40 years ago.
It cost $60 million.
And now, you can go to
an iPhone store, right?
Go to an Apple
Store and buy this.
And it's a million
times cheaper.
Million times cheaper.
For those who say these
tools are only for the rich,
it's a million times
cheaper than what
it used to be 40 years ago,
a million times smaller,
and a thousand
times more powerful.
So that means that, again,
as Kurzweil likes to say,
a young kid in Africa or
Mexico with a smart phone
has better communications
technology than a head of state
had 25 years ago.
So I don't give a
shit how cynical
you are, how skeptical you are.
That's a fact, right?
That's a fact that a young kid
with an internet connection
on their phone has
better communications
technology than a
president had 25 years ago.
Undeniable progress.
Astounding supercomputers
in our pockets.
Now, this reminds me of
Steven Johnson's line
of the adjacent
possible from his book,
"Where Good Ideas Come From."
And he says the
adjacent possible
is a shadow from the
future that hovers
over the present, a
map of all the ways
in which the present
can reinvent itself.
So in terms of we
being the gods now,
we also have to start
thinking in terms
of adjacent
possibilities on the back
of exponential technologies.
What are some of the scenarios,
and tools, and technologies
that you guys modeled
in "Abundance,"
like some shit that just like
blows your mind in terms of
[INAUDIBLE]?
>> So Peter and I are working on
a new book that'll be out next
February, and it opens with
a chapter on the future
of transportation.
And it opens at
the Uber flying car
conference, which took place
in LA eight months ago.
And what you probably
don't know is
that while Uber is going
to go autonomous completely
by 2019 and 2020, by
2023 in LA and Dallas,
we're going to have
flying autonomous taxis.
By the way, so I wrote a
story about a guy named
Dezso Molnar, who's a friend
of mine, who invented probably
the world's first flying
car, flying helicopter that
actually flew and was usable.
This was 15 years ago.
And we've gone from
the very first one that
was a kit car in
somebody's garage
to taxis in three
years, four years--
flying cars.
So that's incredible.
The other one that
I always think of--
and this is an example
that I always sort of like
to give people when I think
about this, because it's
really personal.
Biotechnology is advancing
about four to five times
as fast as Moore's law.
So it is doubling
in power, roughly
every four to five months.
And what that means is every
day we manage to stay alive,
we gain five hours
of life expectancy.
No exercise required.
[LAUGHTER]
That's incredible to me.
>> Wow.
>> That's the one that
always sort of blows my mind.
The other one that
blows my mind--
so a bunch of years ago, I got a
chance to spend a bunch of time
with Hugh Herr, who's the head
of biomechatronics at MIT.
He is the first--
he created the world's
first bionic ankle,
which was the first
FDA-approved bionic body part.
And at the time,
six, seven years ago,
it was so robust
that soldiers were
returning to combat, wearing
them in Afghanistan and Iraq.
People were running triathlons.
So it's a real bionic body part.
And yet, because of the
speed of biotechnology,
it is so five years ago.
Today, 50% of the human body
is replaceable by bionics.
>> 50%?
>> 50%.
50% of you is going to get
swapped out, all right?
With 3D printing body
replacement body parts, right?
That's what's--
>> Well, yeah.
It resonates so deeply with me.
Because I was deeply
affected by a book
I read by Ernest Becker,
called "The Denial of Death."
And the key idea
behind the book is
that the source of our
existential malaise,
our cosmological depression--
we are feeling so
small, is that we are
stuck in these mortal bodies.
But we can kind of contemplate
the infinite, right?
This idea that we've
emerged from nothing.
We have a name.
We have this consciousness of
self, this deep inner feeling,
this excruciating
inner yearning for life
and for self-expression.
We want to sing the songs
that orchestrate the universe.
We want to explore
wonders beyond measure.
We want to experience
transitory, enchanted moments
in which we can hold
our breath, compelled
into aesthetic contemplations
we neither understand or desire,
face to face with
things that are measured
to our capacity for wonder.
I want to drink infinity, right?
And yet--
>> [INAUDIBLE],,
ladies and gentlemen.
>> --I'm bounded.
[APPLAUSE]
I'm finite, right?
And that haunts my
dreams to no end.
I tell people jokingly,
but it's really true.
I'm like a damn hypochondriac.
How could you not be, right?
You're dependent on a heartbeat.
You have so much you want
to do, so much you want, so
many ways you want to express
yourselves, so many books
you want to read, so many
questions you want answered.
And then you get the flu, and
it knocks you on the damn floor.
An invisible force
takes away your agency,
shrinks you down to nothing.
I mean, even the common
cold is existentially
disempowering for a
species that can put
a human being on the damn moon.
So when I think
of biotechnology,
biotechnology means mastering
the information processes
of biology, right?
Because it really starts
to get interesting
when you realize that
we are made of language,
that we are alphabetic all the
way down, that we are literally
made of code, right?
Biology is software that
writes its own hardware.
Our genes are little
software programs.
So we are literally
made of language.
We are literally
information, right?
And so if we could learn
to master that language,
manipulate that language,
reprogram our genes away
from disease, away
from aging, so
that people don't die
from cancer, but also
don't die from time.
Why should time kill us?
If you're a bad person, if you
hurt other people, then, OK.
Put you in a cell.
But if you're like a curious
student of the cosmos,
I want infinity.
Nothing less will do.
Eternity.
Nothing is real
that is not eternal,
said Miguel [INAUDIBLE],,
in tragic sense of life.
And so when I hear that
gene sequencing is going
three times faster than
Moore's law, three times faster
than exponential, and I hear
Craig Venter who synthesized
the first synthetic
organisms say, when asked,
do you worry that
you're playing God?
He said who's playing?
Who's playing?
When I see Larry Page create
Calico, the California life
extension company-- he's
the co-founder of Google,
creating a software
company for biology,
getting a cover on
"Time" magazine called
"Google and the End of Death."
This is where we're heading,
and we shouldn't cower.
And we shouldn't shrink down
before this ambition, right?
But we should rise up
before this ambition.
As Alan Harrington wrote
in "The Immortalist,"
having invented the gods,
we can now turn into them.
And I think nothing
else will do.
And so when are we going to
see radical life extension,
like true radical
life extension?
>> So one, you like
people more than I do.
[LAUGHTER]
So you might be more hopeful
about this particular thing
than I am.
But ignoring that, no, we just--
I just actually wrote
the longevity chapter
for "Convergence" with Peter.
And it is, by the way, hard
to find a longevity company
in the world right now that
my co-author is not somehow
involved in, which is odd.
I think it's
getting interesting.
I think we're going to
start seeing stem cells.
Next 10 years-- we'll
Replacement body parts are
coming a lot faster than you
could possibly imagine.
Again, 10-year,
12-year time horizon.
And there's some just amazing
medical technology that's
also moving this quickly.
So it's going to--
the next 10, 12 years
is when I think we're
going to start seeing
the first edge of those things.
>> 10 to 12?
>> 10 to 12 years.
>> Actual, measurable
[INAUDIBLE]..
>> I want to go back
to, why are you so--
aren't you curious
about what's next?
>> I think I'm just afraid
of being disappointed.
[LAUGHTER]
>> OK, fair point.
>> Plus, I also think we
have such an immense creative
capacity right now to kind
of warp the world and make it
better.
We could also make it worse.
We've made it
worse in some ways.
But in so many ways, we've
made it better, right?
Terence McKenna's wonderful
line that the human-made world
is the condensation
of human imagination.
Or David Deutsch in "The
Beginning of Infinity,"
where he talks about the
notion of the topography
of any great city like
Manhattan or Los Angeles,
and that the physical
topography of a city
is shaped more by
the forces of mind
by creativity, by economics,
by trade, by imagination
than by the forces of geology.
So mind has trumped geology.
And so it's like when
we think of ourselves
and what we are, like
holy shit, right?
We are this emergent
property of the universe
that can self-modify.
And that is like a coral
reef-like animal, an extruder
of technological material.
We take in matter
of low organization.
We put it through the
filters of the human mind.
We extrude space
shuttles and iPhones
and eventually,
hopefully, starships.
Who wouldn't want to be
immortal and go explore
the edges of the universe?
I remember reading
once an article
by Ross Anderson about the
Hubble Space Telescope.
And it was like a
marvelous meditation
on the implications
of what we've
made, what we've conceived, what
we've like literally extruded
from our imagination, right?
He says that the Hubble that
sits in orbit, this space
telescope allows us to
mainline space and time
through the optic nerve, right?
Look at-- listen to the poetry,
but also the literal truth
behind what he's saying.
We've created this
artificial lens.
We've hovered it in space.
And now, we can
mainline the universe
through our optic nerve.
That's what we do, right?
The upright monkey
that shed its fur
can now mainline space and
time through the optic nerve.
And that when we stare at images
of the Hubble of the Deep Field
photographs taken
by the Hubble, we
literally-- through the
sheer aesthetic force
of its discoveries, the
Hubble has distilled
the complex abstractions
of astrophysics
into singular expressions
of color and light
that vindicate Keats' famous
couplet that "Beauty is truth,
and truth is beauty."
So if we are not gods,
then what are we?
I just can't take that in and
somehow assimilate the idea
that we're also breathing pieces
of defecating meat destined
to die and ultimately,
no more significant
than a lizard or a potato.
That duality of us is
so achingly tragic.
We are so beautiful,
but so tragic.
>> I know some
really good lizards.
>> You know some
really good lizards?
[LAUGHTER]
But that's kind of the point.
And so Steven--
I mean, you're a writer.
You're compelled by your
anxiety, your neuroses,
and your creativity to
frenetically output brilliance
that will outlast
you symbolically.
So there must be some part of
you that resonates with that.
Or that's not what
drives your creativity?
>> Yeah.
You make art from a place of
existential dread for sure
and have for as long as
I've known you, which
is a while now and interesting.
I have taken pain and
turned it into art.
And I think that
is what sort of--
anxiety will get you out
of bed and try to turn--
I'll get up early
and start writing.
So I can stop thinking
right away, for sure,
at a low motivation.
But for me, I'm just
a creative, right?
So once I'm done
with the project,
I'm onto the next project.
My editor's happy.
I'm good.
I like-- get me
something else to do.
So the whole idea that
there might be immortality--
I often forget that
I even have readers
on the other end of what I'm
doing, let alone immortality.
Just how I work with it.
>> Sure.
Sure.
>> But you've been actually--
you have actually taken that
existential threat and really--
I mean, A, you've
made art about it.
But you've really been
successful with it, which
makes me wonder if it's just--
is that just extreme anxiety?
[LAUGHTER]
>> Well, it's interesting.
Because I'm very expressive in
my creativity, or I try to be,
because I'm very passionate.
But I create very safe
containers for that.
And I don't know if you
know that line by Flaubert.
He said, "Be disciplined
and orderly in your life,
so that you can be violent
and dangerous in your work."
>> Oh, that's good.
>> And I'd be butchering
it a little bit.
But then there's
this other one that
is-- this has something
to degree of like,
it's our responsibility to
live so intensely that death
will tremble to take us.
So there's definitely
a kind of--
a desire to impose one's will
and den to the cosmos with it.
But rather than
a corrupted will,
a desire to control others, what
governs despots and dictators,
it doesn't come from that.
It comes just from a
desire for aliveness,
a desire for sentience, a
desire for sentience ungoverned
by any constraint, so to speak.
And so that just drives
and pushes me to no end.
And so now that we're kind
of getting into consciousness
now-- so this is
actually a pivot.
We're 30 minutes into
this one-hour session,
and then we'll do a Q&A. Isn't
it quickly how time flies?
So we're talking a little
bit about technology,
and the speed of
innovation, and the fact
that these tools are advancing
at the speed that they are.
And that the tools
to change the world
are now in everybody's hands
from programmable biology
to synthetic biology, to smart
phones the size of blood cells,
to nanobots in our
bodies and brains,
to artificial intelligent
organisms, non-biological minds
that can help us solve any
problem, billion-fold increases
in intelligence.
I mean, this is all
the stuff that's
happening in technology, right?
But in the end,
these technologies
are stewarded by human minds.
And human minds
are really messy.
So another one of the sort of
passions and interests of mine
and of Steven's, ironically--
because again, these are
the videos, topics I explore.
These are the books he writes.
He wrote a book on technology.
He also wrote a book on
human performance and a book
on altered states and
existential desire
for transcendence.
So we live in a world now,
where in spite of our riches,
in spite of our progress,
more people kill themselves
than die from natural disasters
and armed conflict combined.
This is the United
Nations' number.
So that means our
own minds are more
of a danger to us than
terrorism, and war,
and natural disasters,
and hurricanes.
Our own minds, right?
Our own disquiet.
[LAUGHTER]
Depression and anxiety are
said to be at epidemic levels
and yet, there is
radical progress
in the fields of psychology,
technology, neurobiology,
pharmacology, to look at
what's happening in our brains,
both in our agony
and in our ecstasy.
And so Steven is probably one
of the world's premier authors,
thinkers, researchers, who
is putting the information
out there with
the rigor required
to understand what's
actually happening,
so that we can then
modulate, modify, potentially
improve ourselves away from
these pathological mind issues.
So, Steven, where do you
think we stand on the power?
Well, why don't we talk a little
bit about the power of flow,
which is something that
you've written about,
I've made videos about.
Let's talk about the ideal
state of consciousness,
and then let's talk about the
default state of consciousness.
And then let's talk
about how to get
more of the ideal
state of consciousness.
>> So flow is a technical term.
It floats around in the zone,
runner's high, all that stuff.
Scientists define it
as a state of optimal--
an optimal state
of consciousness
where we perform our best
and we feel our best.
And we've all had the
experience, right?
Flow is when you're so
focused on the task at hand
that everything else
just vanishes, right?
Your sense of self
will disappear.
Time will pass strangely.
Occasionally, it'll slow down.
More frequently, it speeds up.
Five hours go by in
like five minutes.
And throughout all aspects
of even performance
would go through the roof.
And flow science dates
back to the 1870s.
Frederick Nietzsche worked
on flow a little bit.
The early studies on
flow date back there.
William James worked on flow
at the turn of the century.
And back then what
was interesting is
flow was not treated--
it was treated as a
mystical experience.
And when William James
wrote about flow,
he thought it was only
reserved for religious people
and spiritual people.
And that's where it showed up.
And in the '50s, Abraham
Maslow came along.
And he was studying
peak experiences,
which is another word for flow.
And he was doing this
huge study on success.
He wanted to know.
At this point,
psychology had sort of
taken a weird turn with
Freud and was really focused
on pathological problems.
And nobody was
interested in exploring
psychological possibilities.
Abraham Maslow came along
and said, no, no, I'm
really interested in
success to do this giant--
first, he did a
historical study.
And then he did a study
of [INAUDIBLE] people.
Very successful-- Albert
Einstein, Eleanor Roosevelt.
Huge study.
And he found, A, all successful
people have found ways
to alter their consciousness,
put themselves into flow,
and use this to drive
their creativity,
their innovation, their success.
And, B, everybody in the
study group was an atheist.
So suddenly,
spiritual experiences,
mystical experiences are out.
Peak experiences are in.
25 years later,
Csikszentmihalyi comes along.
And he asks the more pedestrian
version of Maslow's question.
Maslow was, what do
all successful people
have in common?
Csikszentmihalyi said, no, no.
I just want to know
about everybody.
When we're feeling our best,
when we're performing our best,
what does everybody
else have in common?
He went around the world,
asking people this question.
And they all said
the same thing.
When I'm in the
state, every decision,
every action flows seamlessly,
effortlessly, perfectly
from the last.
So flow is a
phenomenological description.
It's how the state
makes us feel.
And what's
interesting about that
is for every decision, every
action to flow seamlessly,
perfectly, effortlessly
from the last,
you have kind of a
shorthand definition
of what flow kind of is
under the hood, which
is as close to high-speed,
near perfect decision-making
as we can get.
Interesting.
I said as close to, not
perfect decision-making.
Scot Schmidt, one of the
early extreme skiers,
used to say flow makes
me feel like Superman,
up until the moment
I'm not, right?
Word of caution on that one.
>> Oh, well.
>> What's interesting about
flow is the numbers are all over
the place.
But some studies have
found productivity goes up
500%, creativity--
200 to 400%.
And we understand kind
of the neurobiology
underneath all of this.
What's really
getting interesting
is neuroscience, biotechnology.
These are accelerating fields,
again, exponentially moving
forward.
So when I started
this work in 1999,
when I first started
doing flow research,
I remember being on the phone
with Dr. Andrew Newberg.
I don't know if you guys
are familiar with him.
He was the University
of Pennsylvania
neuroscientist who did the
first work on cosmic unity.
He took Tibetan,
Buddhist, and Franciscan
nuns experiencing
oneness with everything
and put them into an fMRI
and tried to figure out
where that came from.
And by the way, if you're
going to my talk tomorrow,
I will tell that story and talk
about where that came from.
We're going to ignore that.
>> Go to his talk
tomorrow, guys.
It's going to be awesome.
>> But I remember talking to
him about flow at the time.
And I said, do you
think in our lifetime
we're ever going to decode this?
Are we going to figure this out?
And both of us were sure
it would not happen.
And here we are--
couple decades later.
And the state of ultimate
human performance-- we
are now starting
to pick it apart.
We understand what
it does to the brain.
We understand what it
does to the physiology.
It's not all the way there.
And there's huge
gaps in the research
we can drive buses through.
But this is ultimate
even performance
that we're being able to decode.
>> I mean, when I
think about flow,
I would go as far as-- once
I understood what flow was
and then I kind of retroactively
looked back on my own life,
every significant moment in my
life, those archived memories,
those bookmarked moments
were flooded by flow, right?
You feel your best, and
you perform your best.
When you say near-perfect
decision-making,
that's when that really
resonated with me
in terms of when I make my
videos, which are not scripted.
They're very much freestyle,
or stream of consciousness,
or like following a
butterfly effect in thought.
So when you think
about the notion
of near-perfect decision-making,
when you're having a riff,
you're having a download.
You're having one of those
moments where it comes
through you, but not from you.
And though it is with
you, belongs not to you.
You're a vessel like the
freestyle rapper or the jazz
musician.
And what happens is the
dorsolateral prefrontal cortex,
right?
The part-- the
self-editor in the brain,
the part that second
guesses and tells you no.
That goes quiet.
And so it's like you
get out of your own way.
It's not just a metaphor.
You literally step
aside from yourself.
But the near-perfect
decision-making part
is the part of
you that is seeing
how all the right
words are emerging
at just the right moment
like the movie, "Limitless,"
when the guy takes that drug.
And it's just like your pattern
recognition ability go up.
But you're at just
the right speed
that you can surf
what's happening.
So if ordinary life
is kind of flat water,
flow is like the perfect wave
that you can surf, not so
much that you're wiping out.
But it's just-- and you're
making just the right decisions
to stay perfectly on the wave
and deliver the perfect riff,
whatever that performance is.
And you're also
really enjoying it.
You're witnessing it happening.
You're witnessing yourself
letting it go through you.
And it's absolutely
exhilarating.
And then if you're smart
enough or lucky enough
to have that be happening
in a context of music,
or freestyle, or writing, so
that it's getting transcribed,
right?
And then when the
experience is over--
because again, it's a
transitory experience.
But then you have evidence.
You have a concrete thing
that came out of you, that you
had to put in a drawer.
And that's one of the most
deeply satisfying experiences
of my life.
Because I've taken ephemeral
ecstasy, and I've bottled it.
I've put a cloak around it, and
that's absolutely exhilarating.
So it's like-- you
said once that people
who discover how to get flow,
build their lives around it.
And those that build
their lives around it
report the highest levels of
life satisfaction of any group,
right?
>> Yeah, which is very true.
It's worth taking that one step
back, because it's more useful.
So what we've discovered over
the past 10 years, 12 years--
and I've been involved
in this research.
A lot of other people have
been involved in this research.
But we figured out
that flow states
have triggers, pre-conditions
that lead to more flow.
And for those of you
who speak science,
the triggers do one
of two things, really.
They either drive norepinephrine
and dopamine into the brain,
which are focusing chemicals.
So what they do
is drive attention
into the present moment.
Or they lower
cognitive load, which
means all the shit you're
trying to think about at once--
that kind of dials back.
And again, same effect.
You get to pay more
attention to the present.
The flow only shows up
when all our attention
is right here, right now.
Very task focused.
So what has happened is we now
know that those states have
20, 21, 22 different triggers.
And there's probably
way more, but that's
what we've discovered so far.
So the people who are
really good at this
and are people who basically
have built their lives
around all of these triggers--
you've done it inadvertently.
And that's actually like--
this leads me to an interesting
question, which is--
so if you read "Stealing
Fire" from me with that book,
at one point in the chapter
on flow, we write about Jason.
And we wrote about his
early childhood experiences
in Venezuela and using
freestyle philosophy as a way
to kind of fight PTSD of growing
up in a tragic situation.
So you were already
flow hacking back then.
What I want to know is, what
were you doing back then?
And how has it changed to now?
How has your process changed
in terms of [INAUDIBLE]??
>> Yeah.
No.
I mean, it was like being
present is very hard for me.
It's very hard.
I've tried meditation and yoga.
And my girlfriend is a
meditator and a yogi.
That might work for some
people if you try really hard,
but it's not a smooth entry
into the present or into flow.
Michael Pollan's book,
"How to Change your Mind--"
in the preface of the book--
describes kind of the
default human condition.
Here I thought I was the only
one struggling with this.
He says the brain is kind of
an artificial intelligence
program.
It takes in data
from the present,
compares that with
data from the past
and uses that to
predict the future.
The brain is essentially
a prediction machine.
And it's doing
that to protect you
from something unexpected
going around the bend.
You're mitigating
against future risk.
And by the way, thinking of
and planning for the future
also is responsible for
us being so successful.
So being in the present all the
time also means you get eaten.
Because the tiger behind
you comes running.
And you never saw it
coming, because you
were busy looking at the
flower that was so beautiful,
so there's a reason for that.
But anyway, he says
that our default
is one of living in a
perpetual future tense
with a low level of anxiety
that's always present.
And the good news is
I'm seldom surprised.
The bad news is I'm
seldom surprised.
And then he says that
one of the things
that commends
travel, art, beauty,
and certain kinds of drugs--
in my case, cannabis--
is that these experiences
block all signals,
forwards and backwards, right?
So it's the comparing this
with the past and predicting.
They just block, throwing you
into the present or the flow.
He writes the word
the flow, of a present
that is literally wonder full--
full of wonder.
Wonder being the byproduct
of exactly that unencumbered
sense of first sight or
virginal noticing to which
the adult mind
has closed itself.
So it's actually by inhibiting
our brains' capacity
to be pre-mapping the
future or living in or using
the past to taint what's
happening, to over-determine
what's happening
by inhibiting that,
by actually constraining
that capacity.
In pot, they call it the messing
with your short-term memory.
It actually ends up
being a good thing.
Because it offers us temporary
relief from a faculty
that evolved to keep
us safe, so to speak.
And we can finally become
innocent bystanders
in the present.
We can be as children.
And that infuses the world
with a sense of wonder.
And then anything that enters
our field of consciousness
in that moment of
hyper-presence--
God, it becomes rich
material for engagement.
So if you're in nature, if
you're among friends you love,
you're seeing them as
if for the first time.
You're engaging with them
with that childlike curiosity.
You can experience them
and contemplate them
all at the same time.
And for me, that
creates euphoria
and probably because
it's an experience
I have so few and far between.
I get euphoric when I
find myself in that state.
I respond to it with euphoria.
It's kind of like getting into
a hot bath when you're cold.
It's amazing for like 15 or 20
minutes, and then you're tired.
And you've got to
get out of the bath.
But I have built my whole
life around those 45 minutes
of pleasure when I
step into that flow.
And then I have my
gear, my camera,
and my whatever for
when I'm on my way
down to describe
what transpired.
That's my entire
creative process A to Z.
And that started in high school,
posting salons with my buddies
and getting high.
We were inspired by Charles
Baudelaire's hashish parties
from the 1920s, when all these
artisan philosophers would
sit around and smoke hash
and then see what transpired.
So, yeah.
Creative process is the same.
I just have a little
more resources now
to create contexts in situations
to hurl me into the present.
>> Nice.
What's interesting-- one of the
things that sort of caught me--
one of the things that's
going on in 3D printing
is they're starting to play
with 3D chemical printers.
So all kinds of--
when you were talking,
what popped into my head
was how much substances--
marijuana psychedelics have
actually tilted culture,
have changed it,
have created so much art.
We're about to get to the point
where we can 3D print chemicals
in our homes, right?
Where it's starting out
with prescription drugs.
You don't have to go
to the drug store,
but we're obviously going
to be able to hack them.
And we're obviously
going to be able to start
to do levels of
consciousness-altering
substance
experimentation at home.
>> [INAUDIBLE]
>> Well, so it's better.
Not only are we getting 3D
chem printers, but both AI
and quantum computing,
which is going
to start to come online
over the next couple years.
The low-hanging fruit in quantum
computing is drug discovery.
And there's
already-- by the way,
we're getting computing.com.
Go there.
You can play with a quantum
computer online for free today.
You can go home and play with
a quantum computer, which
is the craziest thought ever.
But once these things
start to get more powerful,
drug discovery is what
they're best suited for.
That's the low-hanging fruit.
So AIs, quantum computers
with user-friendly interfaces
doing drug discovery and 3D
chem printers in our house.
So everybody is not just
a psychedelic explorer.
Everybody is a
psychedelic chemist.
So if you think about the
really limited pharmacopoeia
that we've had to pick from over
the past couple thousand years
and accelerated the
past couple hundred--
Alexander Shulgin,
for example, who
we write about in
"Stealing Fire" who's
lauded as a pioneer, invented
200 substances of which people
use 7 to 10 of them, right?
Everybody is up-- within 10
years-- we all get to 15 years.
We all get to play
that game if we want to
and what it's going
to do for imagination.
I mean, we're all probably
going to blow ourselves up.
And it'll be Woodstock
inverted, right?
But the research is
going to get interesting.
>> I'm curious, Steven.
You once wrote that
flow saved your life.
You had Lyme disease.
You were in a dark period.
And flow through surfing,
I believe you said,
saved your life.
Can you talk a little bit
about how flow saved your life?
And also, what your--
some of those most
effective and reliable flow
triggers and some
tips and tricks for us
to manage flow cycles,
flow crashes, hangovers,
like the one I'm going
to have after this talk
from the amount of focus--
[INTERPOSING VOICES]
--pattern recognition.
Yeah.
>> You'll be fine.
>> Why sleep is so important
for recovery and replenishment.
Just, I guess, body maintenance
for optimum flow in one's
life without getting burnt out.
>> I'm going to do a lot of
the flow hacking tomorrow,
so I'm going to try to stir
around some of that stuff.
>> Great.
Great.
>> The story--
>> Tease it.
>> Yeah.
The story Jason is referring to,
which I won't tell tomorrow--
when I was 30 years
old, I got Lyme disease,
and I spent three years in bed.
And I was done.
The doctors pulled me off drugs.
My stomach lining
was bleeding out.
There was nothing anybody
else could do for me.
And I was-- so if you're
not familiar what Lyme feels
like on the inside, it's like
the worst flu you've ever had,
crossed with paranoid
schizophrenia.
And the most common
misdiagnosis for Lyme
is paranoid
schizophrenia, because it
gets into your brain.
It massively [AUDIO OUT]
up your brain.
So my short-term
memory was gone.
My long-term memory was gone.
In fact, if I met you
before the age of 30,
I probably don't
know you anymore.
Most of that has been wiped.
I couldn't drive because I
would get to a red light.
It would change to
green, and I would forget
what a green light meant.
So I'd be sitting in LA traffic.
And everybody is honking
at me, and I can't move.
And after about three-- and I
couldn't walk across the room.
I was so sick.
And after about three years
of this, a friend of mine
showed up at my house.
And I was going to kill myself.
I had already-- I had sleeping
pills in the bathroom.
It was just a question of when.
And it wasn't-- and I
was massively depressed.
But I was just
going to be a burden
to my friends and my family.
I was bankrupt.
I lost the woman I
was going to marry.
I lost the job I spent
10 years trying to get.
Blah, blah, blah.
>> Is that normal
for Lyme disease?
>> If it goes
undetected, which--
>> Got it.
>> --this was-- I got it before
Lyme had creeped to California.
>> Got it.
>> So nobody believed it
was Lyme in California.
>> Got it.
>> It took me forever
to get diagnosed.
And in the middle of
this, a friend of mine
shows up at my door.
And she demands
that we go surfing.
And I mean, I literally
can't walk to you.
And it's hysterical.
And she won't leave,
and she won't leave.
And she keeps badgering me.
And she keeps badgering me
and won't leave my apartment.
And after hours of
it, it was like,
I can kill myself tomorrow.
Just anything to
get her to shut up.
Please.
Fine.
And they sort of had
to carry me to the car.
And they drove me
to Sunset Beach,
which if you guys
surf here in LA,
you know that's the
wimpiest beginner
wave in the entire world.
And it was a summer day.
So the waves were really
low, and it was warm.
And they gave me a board
the size of a Cadillac.
And the bigger the board,
the easier it is to surf.
And they literally
had to take my elbows
and walk me out to the break.
And I was out there 30 seconds.
And muscle memory isn't
actually a real thing,
but we're going to use the term.
But muscle memory took over.
A wave came.
And I spun my board.
And I pedaled a couple times,
and I popped up my feet.
And I popped up to a
dimension that I didn't even
know existed, right?
I'm a science guy.
I don't have
mystical experiences.
I certainly don't have
them while surfing.
What is flakier than that?
And suddenly, I felt
like I could see out
of the back of my head,
and time slowed down.
And the best part-- the most
amazing part was I felt good.
I mean, I hadn't felt good in--
I had no idea what good
even felt like anymore.
And suddenly, I felt that good.
All the pain was gone.
I was clear headed.
And that wave felt so good.
I caught four more.
And after five waves,
I was disassembled.
They drove me home.
They put me in bed.
People had to bring me food
for like 15 days, because I
couldn't walk to my kitchen
to make a meal, which
was like 25 feet away.
And on the 15th day, which was
the day I could walk again,
I caught a ride back to the
beach, and I did it again.
And over the course
of about eight months
when the only thing I was
doing differently in my life
was surfing and having
these really crazy,
altered state experiences
that I now know
are flow states, my life--
I went from 10% functional
and suicidal to about 80%
functional and on my way back.
And my first question was, OK,
what the hell just happened?
Because surfing is
not a known cure
for chronic autoimmune
conditions, point A. And point
B, Lyme is only fatal if
it gets into your brain.
And I was really sure
that the only reason
I was having these mystical
experiences in the waves
was because it was in my brain.
And that's what was happening.
And I was going to die
very, very shortly, which
was a very strange situation.
So I lit out on a giant
quest to figure out
what the hell happened to me.
And what I quickly learned--
not quickly.
It took years.
But Herb Benson,
cardiologist at Harvard,
did a lot of this work.
He mapped the neurochemical
cycle underneath flow.
And what he pointed out is
that when we go into flow,
you reset the nervous system.
So Lyme disease-- any
autoimmune condition
is a nervous system
gone haywire.
And when you go
into flow, there's
a global release of a
chemical called nitrous oxide.
And it basically throws
all the stress hormones out
of your system and fills you
with feel-good neurochemistry.
>> Create nitrous oxide?
>> Yeah.
That gas is a single molecule.
It's everywhere in your body.
They're not in a lot of gases--
small molecules in the body.
But that's one of them.
Sorry, we're geeks.
[LAUGHTER]
But all those neurochemicals
besides resetting
the immune system, which is
amazingly powerful if you
have an autoimmune condition.
And Herb Benson
has gone so far as
to say he thinks this
is the mechanism that's
underneath most so-called
cases of spontaneous healing.
It's either placebo
effect or flow
that's pretty much
producing that as
far as science can tell.
Obviously, there might
be other explanations.
But from a scientific
perspective,
that's what we know.
And the other thing is all
those neurochemicals massively
boost the immune system.
So you're resetting
the nervous system.
You're massively boosting
the immune system.
And over a period
of time, I went--
I got back to health.
So that's the story
he's referring to.
And there was a
second part of that.
What else?
Where did--
>> No, just--
>> --you go with that?
>> [INAUDIBLE] that
flow also has a price,
and that you have flow cycles,
and that these experiences can
be addicting.
You could say that flow is the
most addictive state on Earth.
And so it's like, how
do you work around it?
How do you mitigate
the crash from flow?
How do you rest and recuperate?
And how do you avoid crashing?
And also, what's the role
of sleep in recuperating?
And also, what's the
quickest shortcut to flow?
You once called it
the hippie speed ball,
which was 20 minutes of aerobic
exercise, a shot of espresso,
and a joint.
>> Sativa.
It's got to be sativa.
You need dopamine
on the front end.
>> Sativa.
Yeah.
>> Yeah, he's right.
Mimics all of the
neurochemcals or a lot of them.
It's very close to flow.
So let's start with
sleep, cause sleep--
so let's first--
>> My friends make fun of me for
how much I treasure my sleep.
>> Oh, but you and I are
the-- we're the same way
and for the same reason.
So let's start with
what he's referring to,
so you guys can understand it.
He's not kidding
when he says flow
is the most addictive state
on Earth neurochemically.
So we have endogenous
neurochemicals.
We make endorphins.
And we have exogenous chemicals.
Opiates are endorphins, right?
We make our own version of them.
And to put it in
perspective, there
are about 20 different
endorphins in the body.
The most common one is a
hundred times more potent
than medical morphine.
Dopamine is cocaine.
And literally, when
people snort cocaine,
the most addictive substance
on Earth, all that happens
is the brain releases dopamine.
It's a signaling molecule,
and it blocks its reuptake.
Serotonin, which also
shows up in flow,
depending on which
pathway it takes,
it's either MDMA or ecstasy.
You get norepinephrine,
and that is crystal meth.
It's one methyl chain
away from a crystal meth.
Street speed is the
natural version.
You couldn't-- and anandamide,
which is the same psychoactive
that shows up in marijuana--
it's what THC releases
in the brain.
You couldn't cocktail
those drugs on the street.
You'd end up in a coma.
They wouldn't work.
You actually can't-- cocaine
and ecstasy won't work together.
They cancel each other out.
So you couldn't even
do it if you tried.
Flow does it naturally.
This is the most potent
chemical anywhere.
Just to put it in comparison,
romantic love-- and we
all know how good that feels.
That's two chemicals.
That's norepinephrine
and dopamine.
Flow is five of these
chemicals-- most
addictive state on Earth.
And what we've learned--
this is, again, Herbert
Benson's work at Harvard,
who did the
foundational work, is we
used to think flow is a binary.
You're in the zone, you're
not, you're out of the zone.
And we now know it
doesn't work like that.
It's a four-stage cycle.
And you have to move all
the way through all stages.
But once a month or so,
somebody comes up to me
and says, oh, Steven,
you've got to study me.
I'm in flow all the time.
[LAUGHTER]
And in the beginning when
that used to happen to me,
I'd be like, oh, I
don't know if I should
tell this dude the truth.
But now, I just say it.
I'm like, we have
a word for that.
We call that schizophrenia.
[LAUGHTER]
So, yeah.
You don't get to actually
live in flow all the time.
So anybody who's
running around going,
dude, I'm in flow
all the time, yeah,
you're a manic depressive who
should probably see a doctor.
But the point is that
when we go into flow,
it is a neural chemically
expensive state.
And these chemicals are
short lived-- some of them.
Norepinephrine and dopamine,
the romantic love chemicals,
are also your main
focusing chemicals.
Why are TED Talks
20 minutes long?
Because they last about
20 minutes in your brain.
That's how long we can
focus really intensely,
and then it starts to fade away.
We've all had this experience.
You see in the
"James Bond" movie.
Everything blows up for
the first 20 minutes.
And then you're bored for
the next hour and a half.
You're bored because
those explosions
have stolen all your
dopamine and norepinephrine.
And you can no
longer focus at all.
That's what's going
on in your brain.
So on the back end
of a flow state,
big, high,
neurochemically expensive.
There's a crash, right?
It's a recovery phase.
And actually, I think--
and other scientists
and researchers have
kind of pointed at this.
We need much more experiments.
But flow is a really big high.
And I said it was near perfect,
not perfect decision-making.
It's followed by a deep low.
This may actually be
a refractory period.
You had all these great ideas.
And now, you get to look
at them very, very soberly.
I love-- I like writing in flow.
I love editing on the back end.
Because if I like what I
wrote on the back end of it,
I've got no more
feel-good neurochemistry.
Shit's got to be good, because
I'm grumpy as hell, right?
So it works to your benefit
if you know how to use it.
So that's why.
>> Well, that works for
when I do my videos, too.
>> And it's why sleep is so--
>> I've got a certain--
>> --important.
>> --level of peak flow.
And then I sometimes
record then.
But sometimes I record a
little bit in the afterglow.
Before, I fully crashed.
But I'm already kind of
starting to wind down, because--
[INTERPOSING VOICES]
And then I'll watch them
when I'm completely done.
>> You want more flow?
That's one of the worst
things you can do.
And I'll tell you why.
So we've all had
this experience.
[LAUGHTER]
You get into a flow state,
and your ideas are spinning.
And you're like, oh, my God.
I've accessed all these ideas.
I'm going to follow them
out-- every last little one.
I'm going to catch all of them.
Right?
And we're greedy
for those ideas.
And what happens is
by chasing them out,
you're exhausting
all your dopamine,
and you have nothing
to build with.
So--
>> I've had that experience.
>> --this is why Hemingway--
and I learned it from Gabriel
Garca Mrquez.
But both Hemingway and Mrquez
taught writers to quit when
you're most excited.
How do you get up and write
the best the next day?
Quit while you're most excited.
Usually by the time you've
noticed you're most excited,
it's on the tail
end of a flow state,
and you're going to be-- you're
moving downhill from there.
So I sort of do the same thing.
I get to a certain
point now in flow.
And the idea is really spiraling
where I decide I cut it off.
I do something intentionally.
I'll do something that
I never really do,
like I'll watch television
to just like-- it will
stop my brain from doing that.
>> Interesting.
>> Because I don't
want to exhaust it,
because I need more
flow the next day.
Because I'm a creative, and
I have to write every day.
>> Of course.
>> So that's how
I've messed with it.
So those are some
tips and tricks.
>> Excellent.
>> Oh, one other
thing about sleep.
Sleep is obviously
foundational for recovery,
and you can't cheat it, right?
Study after study shows we need
seven to eight hours a night.
There's no real way around it.
Nobody really does better with
less for long periods of time.
Interestingly, if you
don't have enough sleep,
it's really difficult
to get in the flow,
because it's a
high-energy state.
So you need lots of sleep to
maintain the focus, right?
To have specific focus
is expensive to do.
The brain doesn't
like to do it a lot.
>> That makes a lot of sense.
That's why I treasure my sleep.
So that's flow.
And if we learn to
master flow, that's
a great tool in
our toolkit that we
can leverage to boost
performance and make better
decisions, so that we can use
these tools and technologies we
were talking before to impact
the world in a positive way,
because we are the gods now.
I'd like to talk a
little bit about what's
happening with kind of
psychedelic research
for healing ourselves.
So people are dying from trauma.
They're killing themselves.
PTSD people have very
high suicide rates,
depression, anxiety.
People have treatment-resistant
depression and anxiety.
People are a mess.
And some of the most interesting
research happening right now
at places like Imperial College
of London, Johns Hopkins
University, NYU,
and other places
are they're creating these
controlled environments.
And they're bringing people with
treatment-resistant depression,
end of life, anxiety, PTSD.
And they're deploying these
ecstatic technologies.
They're using things like MDMA.
They're using things
like psilocybin
from magic mushrooms.
And in a very safe container,
they're essentially
inducing a mystical experience.
Now, a mystical experience
has to meet certain criteria,
according to William
James, the psychologist who
first created the questionnaire
of a mystical experience.
But what's interesting
is that it's not
the chemistry of
the drugs themselves
that seems to be responsible
for the healing that occurs,
but it's the experience
that they can occasion.
So if a person has a full-on
mystical experience that
meets all the criteria, a
sense of interconnectedness,
a sense of transcendence
of time and space,
a sense of deep well being,
a sense of noetic truth
like a deeper spiritual
truth and day-to-day reality,
a sense of
paradoxicality where they
can hold multiple
truths in mind at once,
a sense that they transcend
their ego-- all these things.
If you have all those things,
if the contents of consciousness
play out and you have this
experience, this ego death,
this transcendence of
self, whatever that may be,
when you come out on
the other side of that,
enormously large
percentage of the people
no longer meet the
criteria for PTSD,
or depression, or anxiety.
A single psilocybin
trip can cure
somebody of multi-year
treatment-resistant depression.
A single-- I think two
or three MDMA sessions--
80% of the patients no longer
met the criteria for PTSD.
The head researcher at
Johns Hopkins University
likened these
mystical experience
as a kind of inverse PTSD.
So if you think of us as
the sum of our experiences
or ourselves as the technology
that turns experience
into biology, we are
what happens to us.
And so of course, trauma is
embedded in your physiology.
It becomes a lens of perception.
It's a past that doesn't
stay in the past.
And you bring it with you to
every moment-- your traumas,
your fears.
But an experience
of outrageous beauty
can do the inverse of that.
An experience of mystical
rapture, poetic reveries,
whatever.
The ontological truth
of these experiences
matters less if the experience
is meaningful to you,
meaningful enough to feel like
you have gone above and beyond
that which ailed you before.
Then it's a kind of inverse
PTSD that actually can heal us.
And people-- and there's
all this research, also,
on awe coming out of Berkeley
and all these other places.
And I think profound
cosmic awe is also
something people experience
when they have psychedelic trips
that are positive.
And awe is an experience of
such perceptual expansion
that your mental
models of reality
need to be upended to fit
in this new information,
to make space now for this
new truth, so to speak.
And that when you have
experiences of awe,
once they're over, you're left
with increased feelings of well
being, increased
feelings of compassion,
and increased feelings
of creativity.
And the experience is
anti-inflammatory in your body
as well.
So this notion of deploying
these ecstatic technologies
in controlled,
responsible environments
and inducing these--
put a cord around it.
Spiritual experiences
heals people.
Now, I'm less interested in
the veracity of what occurred
inside the person's mind.
Christians will see Jesus.
Buddhists will see Buddha.
Nature lovers will see
the sacredness of nature.
The wallpaper-- you talked
about this in "Stealing Fire."
The wallpaper matters less.
Your cultural
constructions usually
will govern what you find
inside the psychedelic trip.
So I'm less interested
in the actual veracity
of your experience.
>> It's actually--
>> I'm only interested--
[INTERPOSING VOICES]
>> --If it was
meaningful to you.
And if it is, then we have
a moral responsibility,
I think, to create
psychedelic spas
and use these modalities
to heal people,
but I'll turn it over to you.
>> Oh, I was just going to get--
the one thing that I think is
really fascinating-- most
people don't know this,
is we only see four patterns
when we hallucinate.
And they're maps.
We see spirals.
We see lattices.
And they're all mapped onto--
so why do things spiral on acid?
When information
comes into the brain,
visual information goes to V1s.
The first level of
visual processing
does edge recognition.
It says this is a straight line.
This is right where this object
ends, and this object begins.
And if you can't do that,
things swirl together.
That's what the
swirling is on acid.
It's the breaking down of
edge recognition, if you want.
So I think that's fascinating.
But I want to expand
on what you said.
There's a reason
he poked at awe.
And he looked at psychedelics.
So what we know is
that roughly there's
differences, but
roughly the same.
William James pointed this
out way back in, I guess,
1902, when he
published "Varieties
of Religious Experiences."
He said two things
about all these.
He went around the world
looking at every kind
of mystical experience
he can find,
including a lot of
psychedelic experiences.
And it didn't matter kind
of what he looked at.
They all-- A, he said,
look, these things--
you can believe what
you want about them,
but they are
psychologically real.
On the other side of
these experiences,
people feel better.
They have better and
more meaningful lives,
and they heal trauma
and blah, blah, blah.
>> Psychologically real.
That's-- excellent term.
[LAUGHTER]
No, because look, look, look.
We all want real real.
I mean, if you have
a psychedelic trip
and you have an
experience of what
you think God is, you
want it to be real real.
It's psychologically real.
But you want it to be real real.
Because that would be something
that you can put in a suitcase
and be like, oh, I
have the actual answer.
And unfortunately, it
doesn't feel like we can ever
know the real real.
But the psychologically real
can still be deeply meaningful.
I'm troubled by the
spiritual narcissism
or spiritual
fundamentalism of people
who have psychedelic experiences
and think that they are
the Messiah, that
the download they
got combined with their
cultural interpretation--
they somehow think is
unbiased, and that they
know unvarnished truth.
And I'm like, no.
You had a deeply psychologically
meaningful experience,
a psychologically
real experience.
But you don't get to tell me
what's true for me at all.
And that's the problem, I think,
when people get up on stages
and start playing Messiah.
Psychedelic guruism
makes me allergic,
and I think it does you, too.
>> Yeah.
I mean, rule one
for me is nobody
gets to make meaning for you.
The minute somebody else
starts making meaning for you,
you just run.
That's rule one.
So what I want to elaborate
on-- and the second thing
William James said
is he said, look,
I think all these
states are the same.
I think flow states,
and trance states,
and out-of-body experiences,
and psychedelic--
I think they're all the same.
What's amazing-- all
right, this is a guy who--
this was the guy who came
up with the idea of stream
of consciousness.
And he wanted to
measure how long.
He figured out that the now
is 12 seconds long by timing
his thoughts with a stopwatch.
This is experiments
in like 1900, right?
Here's the funny thing.
The now is actually
14 seconds long.
So he was off.
He was really close,
besides the point.
But what we now know 110 years
later is he was totally right.
So if you look under the hood of
flow, psychedelic experiences,
trance states, out-of-body
experiences, meditative states,
we roughly see the same three
or four things happening.
There are differences.
You get way more serotonin and
a lot of psychedelic experiences
and blah, blah, blah.
So there's differences,
but they're
roughly the same experience.
And what this means is-- for
example, let's take trauma.
Today, we have all
kinds of options.
So you referenced my friend,
Rick Doblin's early experiments
with Michael Mithoefer--
PTSD and MDMA--
where they found one
to three sessions
of MDMA therapy
was enough to either totally
take people off their meds
or completely reduce
their use, right?
That was amazing.
And that was done with
soldiers returning
from wars in Afghanistan, and
Iraq, and with victims of child
abuse and sexual abuse.
And then the Army came
along and said, OK, well, we
need that kind of
healing for our soldiers,
but we don't want to
use a psychedelic.
Let's try to substitute flow
and more specifically, the flow
produced by surfing
and talk therapy.
So the same thing in
psychedelic therapy
where you had psychedelic
and talk therapy.
They just used
surfing as a producer,
as a trigger for flow
and talk therapy.
And they found that five weeks
of surfing, plus talk therapy
was enough to completely
cure or significantly reduce
instances of PTSD.
And then they came back a
couple years later and said,
OK, let's try meditation
and talk therapy.
And they found that four
weeks of meditation and talk
therapy-- not quite as effective
as the other two technologies,
but again, significant
reduction in medication.
And the point is that whether
it's skills or healing,
a lot of what nature
designed us to do
was to shift our state
of consciousness.
That's how.
So creativity is
a great example.
We have overwhelming evidence
that we suck at training people
to be more creative, right?
It's the most important
skill in the 21st century.
It doesn't matter
if you're talking
about qualities in a CEO
or what our kids need
to learn in school.
Creativity tops every list.
And we suck at training
people to be more creative.
And the reason is we keep trying
to trade up a set of skills.
What we need to be doing is
training up a state of mind,
because that's how
we're creative.
We switch our consciousness.
That also turns out
how we heal trauma.
And metabolized trauma,
also in a big way,
is switch our consciousness.
The simple explanation
is I always tell
people, if you're
ever heartbroken,
you want to get over it
really fast, go skydiving.
Simplest, literally.
Because with trauma, it's just
pathways in the brain, right?
It's like water
carving a canyon.
Everything goes there.
And nothing is more powerful
than the [INAUDIBLE]..
So you need an experience.
>> Shake the snow globe.
>> You need to--
right.
As Robin Carhartt Harris
says at Imperial--
I friended-- you
shake the snow globe.
You need an experience
that is more powerful--
>> That's right.
>> --than the thing that crushed
you to create a new memory,
right?
>> 100%.
>> And so one of the things
psychedelics will do--
>> So they say you need one
nail to take out the other nail.
[LAUGHTER]
But it's so interesting.
Because some people will
say to get over heartbreak,
meet a new girl.
But what you're saying
goes deeper than that.
Because you're saying
neurobiologically,
it doesn't have to just
be meet a new person.
Just go have a new
experience that
is so powerful that the
presence supersedes the past.
Because when you're
heart-broken,
the whole point is you're not
living in the present, right?
She broke up with you,
or he broke up with you.
And now, every present moment
is tainted by the past, right?
David Lenson calls it
temporal dislocation.
And he was talking about
what happens to people
with bad trips on drugs.
But I think it applies to sober
states when your heart-broken--
>> By the way, I
do want to say--
>> --which is also a bad trip.
But he basically says that
the past trauma is now
over-determining the present.
And by over-determining
the present,
it means that what's
happening now--
we're fine.
But I'm seeing dark.
I'm seeing black, because
of that past trauma.
And then by over-determining
what's happening now,
bringing that anxiety
into what's happening now,
I'm now conjuring up a future
that becomes identified
with doom, death, despair.
Hyperpression
[INAUDIBLE] of mortality
is an integral part of
every bad psychedelic trip.
The doom, doom.
I'm not going to make
it past the next moment.
The essence of a
panic attack is that.
I'm dying right
now, so to speak.
And so he says that when--
but he says
eventually the present
will supersede the past.
So enough time passes
that you can overcome
this temporal dislocation.
Or you can have a sufficiently
powerful experience
that's positive that replaces--
it just dissipates that
wedge, that trauma.
That's David Lenson's idea.
What were going to say?
>> Oh.
Yep, it's gone.
Totally gone.
Got lost in the Jason.
>> We have, I think,
a few minutes left.
Maybe we'll take some
questions from the audience.
I already see a hand over there
if you can speak up, unless--
>> [INAUDIBLE]
>> OK.
OK.
And we'll just share this one.
>> Hi.
Excuse me.
I've been talking so
much this weekend.
So I'm a very strong woman--
alpha, right?
Have put a lot on my plate.
I literally have so many
projects going on at one time.
I'm a very structured,
Virgo brained, logical side.
And my question is,
how can I kind of help
myself create a little
bit of structure
to integrate flow into my life?
And what would you suggest
that would look like,
whether it's ingesting
cannabis, or maybe taking
an hour out of my day,
or something like that.
I literally live so structured
that it's hard for me
to break out of that.
So if any suggestions on
how to integrate flow,
what that can look
like from flow masters.
>> I mean, I would say that
novelty in an uninterrupted
setting with a little bit
of cannabis and somebody you
really, really like.
It's a little bit
like improv theater.
You know how they say that
improv is so good for getting
rid of anxiety?
Because when you're on stage
doing like an improv troupe,
it's like, OK,
here's the setting.
Here's the situation.
Go.
And once they say go, well,
now you're in the present.
Now, you are in it.
And so I always say when
you're creating an experience,
it's like you're
picking the location.
It means you're
setting the stage.
You're window-dressing
the stage.
Because once you hit go
and you're in the present,
that stage is going
to be where you're
going to be interacting with.
So pick a place.
And then pick the people.
It's the ingredients
in the salad.
Because once you get
stoned, those people
are going to now infuse
into your experience.
Somebody once said that cannabis
intoxication is a fusion
of cognition and dream.
So I often think of
the film "Inception,"
like when they're dreaming.
If they're dreaming
in the real world.
And then in layer one,
they're like whatever,
having something
happen in the dream.
In the real world, you
pour water on them.
And in the dream world,
it starts to rain.
And that's kind of what
happens when you're high.
Whatever you've preplanned
and the people that you're
with-- once you enter
that altered states,
all those things are going to
infuse into the waking dream
that you're having into,
quote unquote, "your trip."
And so that's very
important that you
plan the context in which
you're going to submit.
Because at some point,
you have to submit, right?
And I think it was
Robert Moore who said,
"If you cannot submit,
you cannot die.
If you cannot die,
you cannot be reborn."
But he's talking about a
psychological surrendering
into the moment, the bliss
crucifixion, as our friend,
Jamie Wheal likes to say.
So, yeah.
I think it's about curation.
>> Give me that.
[LAUGHTER]
You're done.
You're fired.
[LAUGHTER]
Jason is not wrong.
Personally, you can use
a lot of technologies.
You can use a lot
of pharmacologies.
I don't like to depend
on either, which is not
to say that I don't like them.
It's that I want to be
able to be at my best
when I need to be at my best.
I don't want to have to--
so I like the psychological
triggers-- novelty, complexity,
unpredictability.
Jason is not wrong.
They spike dopamine 400%.
This is Robert Sapolsky's
work at Stanford.
And so those are great,
great flow triggers.
Risk is a great flow trigger.
From your description
of yourself,
it sounds like you
could use some.
>> Oh, I take risk.
But I also jam pack my schedule.
I'm an entrepreneur, so
everything I do is work.
>> So figure out what it is.
Figure out the main
activity that gives you
the most flow that's
outside of work
and just do it as
much as you can.
I run three companies,
and I write a book a year.
And twice a week
I find a full day
to hurl myself down mountains at
high speeds on mountain bikes,
or on skis, or whatever.
And the reason is in flow work,
we always talk about this.
You've got to go
slow to go fast.
So you think if you take two
days off to go do whatever
it is that you're going to
do, that'll produce more flow,
you're going to lose time.
You're 500% more
productive in flow.
This is not just a
number I'm throwing out.
McKinsey did a study of
top executives in flow.
It was subjectively reported,
so take it or leave it.
But across the board-- and
a huge swatch of people.
They reported being
5X more productive.
Put that in context.
It's 500% more productive.
It means you got
to work on Monday.
Spend it in flow state.
You can take Tuesday
through Friday off,
and you're going to get as
much done as your steady state
peers.
It's a massive acceleration.
So even though it feels
like you're wasting time,
you're actually gaining time.
>> Wow.
Using flow every day-- since
you're a structured creative,
you write every day, right?
>> I do write every day.
And I would say--
and this is after
years of working at it.
So flow is a spectrum, right?
It goes from-- it's like
any emotion angle, right?
You're a little irked.
You're [INAUDIBLE]---- it's
still the same emotion, right?
Flow works the same way.
You can be in a
state of micro-flow
where flow's core
characteristics show up
a little bit or
macro-flow, which
is the full-blown mystical
experience that I had.
Micro-flow-- most
people, by the way,
spend 5% of their work
life in micro-flow
and don't even realize it.
So I would say 90% of the
time I can drop into flow.
Now, sleep is absolutely
critical for me.
Not for me.
I can do it.
I've tried it.
There's no food that I can
correlate with flow whatsoever.
There's no nutrition that
I can correlate with flow.
In fact, I did a 10-year
study on myself in skiing,
trying to correlate it to food.
And I found that the thing
that produced the most flow
is when I didn't have
time to eat breakfast,
and stopped at the gas station,
and bought cheap donuts.
Yeah, that produced
the most flow.
So there's literally--
as far as I can tell,
that's just a fast
metabolism and energy there.
So I don't see any
correlation there.
But, yeah, does that help?
>> Yeah.
I'll ask him.
Do you do flow every day?
>> Do I do flow every day?
>> Flow every day?
>> No.
I mean, no, no.
But if I get good sleep, I am
comfortable with my baseline
for the first few hours
of the day in the sense
that if I get good
sleep, I'm just
kind of happy with the
calmness with which I wake.
And then it's like some
coffee, some emails,
get this shit done, so to speak.
And then usually by noon or
1 o'clock, I'm ready to flip.
So it's like I go from morning
and convergent thinking.
And then in the afternoon, I
want like divergent thinking.
I want to go for
a hike, and I want
to have unexpected insights,
and et cetera, et cetera.
But I tend to be--
I tend to purposefully
treat myself
in a very calm matter on a day--
calm manner-- sorry--
on a day-to-day basis.
Because it's kind of like--
in a way it's like this
monk-like quietness,
so that when the
opportunity for flow comes,
I can just fully roar into it.
Because there's nothing I hate
more than giving my energy away
for something not deeply
meaningful like that.
I then get real
self-critical like,
why did I allow that to happen?
Like to let somebody
cannibalize my time
in meaningless engagement.
Sometimes I have to
avoid people, too,
because I find certain
people draining.
No offense to them.
It's just me.
I just-- I want to
save my engagement
for the deeply meaningful.
And I will build my whole life
according to that value system.
>> One more question.
>> One more question,
and then we're done.
Because we're
almost out of time.
>> So pick.
You pick.
>> Point at somebody.
>> Sure.
>> So wait, wait, wait.
>> So projecting, let's say,
15 years ahead, instead of 10,
do you think that flow
will enhance our lives,
our longevity?
Or do you think it will
diminish our longevity
in a scientific point of view?
>> Why longevity?
>> Well, longevity,
living longer, right?
>> I mean, here's--
I got into-- when
I wrote up on this,
we said earlier that
technology gives us
the potential to solve the
world's greatest challenges.
And I said it's going
to require the largest
cooperative effort in history.
And when I say
that, I don't just
mean it's going to require
everybody working together
to solve these problems.
I mean, everybody at their
absolute best working together.
And that means flow, right?
So I think we're
all going to have
to get very, very good at this.
And by the way, it's
already happening.
I mean, the last company--
I was with the Flow
Genome Project--
has been training
up corporations
all across the boards.
A lot of other
organizations are doing it.
This stuff is working
its way into business.
It's already deep into the arts.
This is human performance.
And an accelerated-- one of
the most interesting things
about flow is that
if you're going
to keep pace in an
exponential world,
you need to do two things.
You need to move at
speed, and you need
to be able to think at scale.
And as Jason pointed
out, the human brain
doesn't think at scale, right?
We literally cannot
process exponential change.
In flow, we can.
Everything speeds up.
Literally, the brain's
pattern recognition-- we take
in more information per second.
We process this more quickly.
So we can-- that's how our
brains can think in this world.
So I think it's going
to be fundamental.
If we're going to see
50 years from now,
we're going to need this.
The other thing that's
interesting about flow
is-- and it's not guaranteed.
But it does tend to produce
more empathy over time,
especially expanding it
into the natural world.
So it expand-- the flow tends
to not only increase empathy.
It tends to expand
the line of empathy
often beyond the border of
species, which is the biggest--
one of the reasons we're in a
giant environmental crisis is
it's not empathy for all.
It's empathy for
humans, perhaps,
but we don't see plants.
We don't see animals.
We don't see ecosystems.
So we don't realize
that we're in the middle
of the sixth great extinction.
>> Just to follow up then,
what do you think the chemical
impact on our actual biological
systems is being triggered
by flow?
>> Is flow taxing on the body?
>> In a chemical way.
>> Oh, will it
shorten your life?
No, it will actually--
so that's interesting.
That's an interesting question.
We don't know.
What we do know-- and this is
extremely well established.
This is sort of in
positive psychology.
There are three
levels of happiness.
There's happiness--
how you feel right now.
And there's not a whole
lot you can do there.
There's a little bit of
techniques you can have.
But pretty much it's--
a lot of it's genetic.
A lot of it's nature, nurture.
You can't do much.
Second level is what they call
enjoyment, which is literally
a high flow life, right?
And the third level
is a meaningful life.
And that's high flow,
plus purpose, basically.
So what we know is the
people who score off
the charts for overall
life satisfaction,
by the way which
correlates with longevity,
are the people who have the
most flow in their lives.
So indirectly, there
should be a correlation
between flow and longevity.
But, one, no, I have no
idea how we would study it.
And nobody I know has even
poked at it, but it's--
I mean, you're thinking
along the right lines,
but we're just not there yet
from a research perspective.
And I try not to
speculate on stage.
[LAUGHTER]
>> All right.
Thanks.
>> What if it's her birthday?
>> Say again.
>> It's her birthday.
>> OK, go for it.
>> I had a question.
>> Yes.
>> OK, thank you.
So I am so incredibly
awe inspired,
like that awe inspiring.
>> Beautiful.
>> You do that for me.
Thank you so much.
>> You're welcome.
I would love to know, because
I am motivated by triggers.
And that's my
progressive growth,
and I'll never stop that.
But can I just know
in the way that I
relate to you, what is your
most awe-inspired heaven?
I just want to be
inspired by that for you
for a moment on my birthday.
>> My most awe-inspired heaven?
You mean like the
scenario in which I--
>> Whatever is perfect for you.
What do you want
in life the most?
>> Oh, what do I want
>> What is your most
awe-inspiring moment?
I want-- this is my
birthday cake right now.
[LAUGHTER]
You're my intellectual
dessert right now.
[CHEERING]
>> You guys are awesome.
OK.
>> I love you.
>> The experience that I like
the most psychologically is
probably catharsis.
I remember reading this
line by Alain de Botton.
He said, "You don't cry
because something is sad.
You cry because something
is more beautiful
than you expected it to be."
And so when I am plotting
my next container for a flow
experience, whether it's a trip
with friends to South Africa
to go on safari and to
make sure that we have
ganga right before
we go on safari
and that it's sunset
so that it's perfect,
and we play the
inception score, and then
we encounter the lions, and
we have a moment of grace,
I like to create--
>> He's kidding, by the way.
[LAUGHTER]
>> It sounds amazing to me.
>> I like to create
my own movie.
I really-- I think of
myself as when I'm in flow,
I want to do the following.
I want to simultaneously
be the director,
like the DP of the film, the
actor, and the editor, right?
So I want to perform
in my own movie.
I want to steer where
the camera goes.
But then I also want to make
like editing choices of like,
cue this song,
cut to this scene.
I want to do all those
things at once, right?
So it's a kind of waking--
>> [INAUDIBLE]
>> No.
Well, no, because-- yeah.
I mean, he's making
a joke about it.
No.
It's about trying to artfully
induce beautiful moments very
consciously and very creatively
and making sure that my mind--
because I'm normally such
a skeptic, making sure
that my mind is primed
for high suggestibility,
so that I'm open to the
experience I'm giving myself,
rather than closed to
it, which is how I often
am when I'm in my default mode.
So it's like as long as I can
create some of those moments
sometimes, and get the
grace that comes from it,
and then the tears from
catharsis from realizing, wow,
I'm having a holy moment, that
fills my chalice for a couple
days.
So that's-- yeah, that's it.
And then I can
hopefully make a video
and share it with people, which
is like the icing on the cake,
right?
Because he's saying
that sounds like
such self-indulgent behavior.
But it's like Joseph
Campbell said,
"You're not in a quest
to save the world,
but to save yourself."
And in doing so,
you save the world.
Because when I do
those things, I
output so much more content that
ends up resonating with people.
And then I'm like,
oh, I actually
am being of service, too.
So that's it.
>> Thank you.
[APPLAUSE]
>> Thank you, guys.
We are the gods now.